---
layout: post

title: High Performance Computing For Everyone
subtitle: "What if all I needed was my library card?"
cover_image: plain.jpg

excerpt: "What can you do with a general purpose GPU?"

author:
  name: Sean Brewer
  twitter: seabre
  bio: GigLab Co-founder
  image: bloggers/sb.jpg
---

In 1969, the world of computing was still young. The idea of a personal computer was basically non-existent. Computing was reserved for universities, governments, and large corporations that could afford the expense. In college, I had a professor that told me how he used to avoid having to pay to run his programs for classwork, written on punch cards, on his university's mainframe. The computing power of the Apollo 11 guidance computer doesn't even come close to the [cell phones that are in 91% of US citizen's pockets](http://www.pewresearch.org/fact-tank/2013/06/06/cell-phone-ownership-hits-91-of-adults/). Neither did the mainframe at that university.

Fast forward to 2014: a few months ago, I was working on a project where I needed to create a [Minecraft world of Chattanooga using real data](https://github.com/ChattanoogaPublicLibrary/voxel-chattanooga). I tried rendering the world using personal hardware that I have access to. But, that was a massive failure. It crashed my machines no matter what I tried. I then looked elsewhere to Amazon EC2, which offers virtual machines for my exact need. The particular one I used had two graphics processing units (GPUs). I used both of them! Seriously! It also had 16 cores, and 22GB of RAM. For that particular EC2 instance, it cost me about $16 for the four hours it took to render that world. In the present, for me to even have access to that kind of hardware for $16 is amazing. What if I had access to this kind of hardware with just my library card, though? That would be even more fantastic. At The GigLab, you will. Even the general purpose GPUs.

What can you do with a general purpose GPU? The most common applications of general purpose GPUs are where problems are embarrassingly parallel. Problems are embarassingly parallel when there is little to no effort required to separate the problem into many parallel tasks. This includes problems like face recognition, computer simulations, and raytracing (3D graphics). Programming for the GPU can somewhat difficult. There are libraries for programming languages like R, Python, and Haskell that make it much easier. One thing I would like Open Chattanooga to do is to build a simulation of bus routes like [TransitStopMotion](https://github.com/mattgrande/TransitStopMotion) using the GPU hardware.

The hope for The GigLab is to be a place where people can experiment, build prototypes, or just learn how to use hardware that they wouldn't have access to. I am helping start a group that will be working through ["Parallel and Concurrent Programming in Haskell"](http://chimera.labs.oreilly.com/books/1230000000929). The book has an entire section devoted to GPU computing, and I am excited that we will have access to this hardware at The GigLab to explore. Education removes the magic of the mysterious. I feel The GigLab can do that for high-performance computation.



